h3. In-class Lab 8.1

h3. Exercise 1

# If using your Linux VM, create directory *lab08* under your */var/www/labs* directory. Otherwise create directory *lab08* under the document root of whatever web server you are using. On the MATC Windows lab computers that will be: C:\Inetpub\wwwroot
# In jEdit or another text editor, create an *HTML form* file that contains three text fields.
# The first text field will hold the name of the form user. The second text field will hold the phone number of the form user. The third will hold the form user's email address.
# The *ACTION* attribute of the form tag should be assigned the name of the PHP script that will handle your form. Your form should use the GET method. Call it *@lab8x1script.php@*
# Save the form file as *@lab8x1form.html@* in the *lab08* directory you created in step #1.
# Open *@lab8x1form.html@* in a browser to test whether it contains syntax errors, and fix any errors you encounter.

h3. Exercise 2

# Create a PHP script named *@lab8x1script.php@* and save it into your *lab08* directory.
# Use the *@$_GET@* superglobal array to assign the form fields to PHP variables. Give the PHP variables names that differ from the form field names.
<br />*Note:* Do not use an *@extract($_REQUEST)@* or *@extract($_GET)@* function call to create the PHP variables!
# Add PHP code to print the values of the three form fields the user entered in the *@lab8x1form.html@* HTML form.
# Test to see if any of the form fields is empty, and print a "no value submitted" message instead of the field value if that is the case.
# Test your code and show it to your instructor.

h3. Exercise 3

* Modify your HTML form and PHP script to use the POST method instead of GET.
* Name the revised form file *@lab8xp1form.html@* and the revised PHP script *@lab8xp1script.php@*.
* Again, be sure to test to see if any of the form fields is empty, and print a "no value submitted" message instead of the field value if that is the case.
* Test your code and show it to your instructor.

<br />

---

[[Unit Eight => 152-166 Unit Eight Index]]
