h2. In-class Lab 10.1


h3. Exercise 1

# If using your Linux VM, create directory *lab10* under your */var/www/labs* directory. Otherwise create directory *lab10* under the document root of whatever web server you are using. On the MATC Windows lab computers that will be: C:\Inetpub\wwwroot
# In jEdit or another text editor, create a PHP script file named *@lab10x1e1.php@* that uses the *@preg_match()@* function to find patterns in a string.
# Declare a string variable and assign it the value:
<br /><br /> "The dog's not the turkey, the turkey's the turkey, you turkey!"
# Use *@preg_match()@* to search your string for the word "turkey".
# If the word is found print an appropriate message, such as: "I found the turkey", otherwise print out a message such as: "I did not find the turkey".
# Also, print out the contents of the optional third argument to *@preg_match()@*, an array of matched paterns, using the built-in function *@print_r@*.

h3. Exercise 2

# Create a PHP script named *@lab10x1e2.php@* and save it into your *lab10* directory.
# Again, declare a string variable and assign it the value:
<br /><br /> "The dog's not the turkey, the turkey's the turkey, you turkey!"
# This time use *@preg_match_all()@* to search your string for the word "turkey".
# If the word is found print an appropriate message, such as: "I found the turkey", otherwise print out a message such as: "I did not find the turkey".
# Also, print out the contents of the optional third argument to *@preg_match_all()@*, an array of matched patterns, using the built-in function *@print_r@*.
# Test your code and show it to your instructor.

<br />

---

[[Unit Ten => 152-166 Unit Ten Index]]
