h2. Installing PHP

---

* Before starting the installation, you first need to know what you want to use PHP for. There are three main uses for PHP, as described in the "What does PHP do?" section.
* In this course we will focus on server-side scripting, and for that we need three things:
## PHP itself
## a web server
## a web browser
* You probably already have a web browser, and depending on your operating system setup, you may also have a web server (e.g. Apache on Linux and Apple OSX; IIS on Windows). You may also rent Web space at a company. This way, you don't need to set up anything on your own, only write your PHP scripts, upload them to the server you rent, and see the results in your browser.
* While setting up the server and PHP on your own, you have two choices for the method of connecting PHP to the server. For many servers PHP has a direct module interface (also called SAPI). These servers include Apache, Microsoft Internet Information Server (IIS), Netscape and iPlanet servers. Many other servers have support for ISAPI, the Microsoft module interface. If PHP has no module support for your web server, you can always use it as a CGI or FastCGI processor. This means you set up your server to use the CGI executable of PHP to process all PHP file requests on the server.
* If you are also interested in using PHP for command line scripting (e.g. writing scripts to autogenerate images for you offline, or to process text files based on some arguments you pass to them), you will need the command line executable. For more information, connect to the online PHP Manual at http://www.php.net/manual/en/index.php and read the section about writing command line PHP applications. In this case, you need no server and no browser.
* With PHP you can also write desktop GUI applications using the PHP-GTK extension. This is a completely different approach than writing web pages, as you do not output any HTML, but manage windows and objects within them. For more information about PHP-GTK, please visit the site dedicated to this extension: http://gtk.php.net/ PHP-GTK is not included in the official PHP distribution.
* On Linux distributions such as Red Hat, Fedora, SuSE and Ubuntu, you can choose to install PHP (along with MySQL and Apache) when you initially install the operating system and have a decent LAMP environment set up with no additional work.
* I will not attempt to give my own set of install instructions here. They would be outdated literally days after I wrote them. The online PHP Manual provides installation guides at: http://www.php.net/manual/en/install.php
* For lab and project work in this class we will use both the PHP/IIS installation on the lab's Windows computers and a PHP/Apache installation on an Ubuntu Linux virtual machine which you may run using VMWare Workstation on your lab computer.

